
                                 fdnapars 



Function

   DNA parsimony algorithm

Description

   Estimates phylogenies by the parsimony method using nucleic acid
   sequences. Allows use the full IUB ambiguity codes, and estimates
   ancestral nucleotide states. Gaps treated as a fifth nucleotide state.
   It can also fo transversion parsimony. Can cope with multifurcations,
   reconstruct ancestral states, use 0/1 character weights, and infer
   branch lengths

Algorithm

   This program carries out unrooted parsimony (analogous to Wagner
   trees) (Eck and Dayhoff, 1966; Kluge and Farris, 1969) on DNA
   sequences. The method of Fitch (1971) is used to count the number of
   changes of base needed on a given tree. The assumptions of this method
   are analogous to those of MIX:
    1. Each site evolves independently.
    2. Different lineages evolve independently.
    3. The probability of a base substitution at a given site is small
       over the lengths of time involved in a branch of the phylogeny.
    4. The expected amounts of change in different branches of the
       phylogeny do not vary by so much that two changes in a high-rate
       branch are more probable than one change in a low-rate branch.
    5. The expected amounts of change do not vary enough among sites that
       two changes in one site are more probable than one change in
       another.

   That these are the assumptions of parsimony methods has been
   documented in a series of papers of mine: (1973a, 1978b, 1979, 1981b,
   1983b, 1988b). For an opposing view arguing that the parsimony methods
   make no substantive assumptions such as these, see the papers by
   Farris (1983) and Sober (1983a, 1983b, 1988), but also read the
   exchange between Felsenstein and Sober (1986).

   Change from an occupied site to a deletion is counted as one change.
   Reversion from a deletion to an occupied site is allowed and is also
   counted as one change. Note that this in effect assumes that a
   deletion N bases long is N separate events.

   Dnapars can handle both bifurcating and multifurcating trees. In doing
   its search for most parsimonious trees, it adds species not only by
   creating new forks in the middle of existing branches, but it also
   tries putting them at the end of new branches which are added to
   existing forks. Thus it searches among both bifurcating and
   multifurcating trees. If a branch in a tree does not have any
   characters which might change in that branch in the most parsimonious
   tree, it does not save that tree. Thus in any tree that results, a
   branch exists only if some character has a most parsimonious
   reconstruction that would involve change in that branch. It also saves
   a number of trees tied for best (you can alter the

   number it saves using the V option in the menu). When rearranging
   trees, it tries rearrangements of all of the saved trees. This makes
   the algorithm slower than earlier versions of Dnapars.

   The input data is standard. The first line of the input file contains
   the number of species and the number of sites.

   Next come the species data. Each sequence starts on a new line, has a
   ten-character species name that must be blank-filled to be of that
   length, followed immediately by the species data in the one-letter
   code. The sequences must either be in the "interleaved" or
   "sequential" formats described in the Molecular Sequence Programs
   document. The I option selects between them. The sequences can have
   internal blanks in the sequence but there must be no extra blanks at
   the end of the terminated line. Note that a blank is not a valid
   symbol for a deletion.

Usage

   Here is a sample session with fdnapars


% fdnapars 
DNA parsimony algorithm
Input sequence: dnapars.dat
Input tree file: 
Output file [dnapars.fdnapars]: 

Adding species:
   1. Alpha
   2. Beta
   3. Gamma
   4. Delta
   5. Epsilon

Doing global rearrangements on the first of the trees tied for best
  !---------!
   .........
   .........

Collapsing best trees
   .

Output written to file "dnapars.fdnapars"

Tree also written onto file "dnapars.treefile"

Done.


   Go to the input files for this example
   Go to the output files for this example

Command line arguments

   Standard (Mandatory) qualifiers:
  [-sequence]          seqsetall  File containing one or more sequence
                                  alignments
  [-intreefile]        tree       (no help text) tree value
  [-outfile]           outfile    Output file name

   Additional (Optional) qualifiers (* if not always prompted):
   -weights            properties Weights file
   -maxtrees           integer    Number of trees to save
*  -[no]thorough       toggle     More thorough search
*  -[no]rearrange      boolean    Rearrange on just one best tree
   -transversion       boolean    Use transversion parsimony
*  -njumble            integer    Number of times to randomise
*  -seed               integer    Random number seed between 1 and 32767 (must
                                  be odd)
   -outgrno            integer    Species number to use as outgroup
   -thresh             toggle     Use threshold parsimony
*  -threshold          float      Threshold value
   -[no]trout          toggle     Write out trees to tree file
*  -outtreefile        outfile    Tree file name
   -printdata          boolean    Print data at start of run
   -[no]progress       boolean    Print indications of progress of run
   -stepbox            boolean    Print out steps in each site
   -ancseq             boolean    Print sequences at all nodes of tree
   -[no]treeprint      boolean    Print out tree
*  -[no]dotdiff        boolean    Use dot differencing to display results

   Advanced (Unprompted) qualifiers: (none)
   Associated qualifiers:

   "-sequence" associated qualifiers
   -sbegin1            integer    Start of each sequence to be used
   -send1              integer    End of each sequence to be used
   -sreverse1          boolean    Reverse (if DNA)
   -sask1              boolean    Ask for begin/end/reverse
   -snucleotide1       boolean    Sequence is nucleotide
   -sprotein1          boolean    Sequence is protein
   -slower1            boolean    Make lower case
   -supper1            boolean    Make upper case
   -sformat1           string     Input sequence format
   -sdbname1           string     Database name
   -sid1               string     Entryname
   -ufo1               string     UFO features
   -fformat1           string     Features format
   -fopenfile1         string     Features file name

   "-outfile" associated qualifiers
   -odirectory3        string     Output directory

   "-outtreefile" associated qualifiers
   -odirectory         string     Output directory

   General qualifiers:
   -auto               boolean    Turn off prompts
   -stdout             boolean    Write standard output
   -filter             boolean    Read standard input, write standard output
   -options            boolean    Prompt for standard and additional values
   -debug              boolean    Write debug output to program.dbg
   -verbose            boolean    Report some/full command line options
   -help               boolean    Report command line options. More
                                  information on associated and general
                                  qualifiers can be found with -help -verbose
   -warning            boolean    Report warnings
   -error              boolean    Report errors
   -fatal              boolean    Report fatal errors
   -die                boolean    Report deaths


   Standard (Mandatory) qualifiers Allowed values Default
   [-sequence]
   (Parameter 1) File containing one or more sequence alignments Readable
   sets of sequences
   [-intreefile]
   (Parameter 2) (no help text) tree value Phylogenetic tree
   [-outfile]
   (Parameter 3) Output file name Output file <sequence>.fdnapars
   Additional (Optional) qualifiers Allowed values Default
   -weights Weights file Property value(s)
   -maxtrees Number of trees to save Integer from 1 to 1000000 10000
   -[no]thorough More thorough search Toggle value Yes/No Yes
   -[no]rearrange Rearrange on just one best tree Boolean value Yes/No
   Yes
   -transversion Use transversion parsimony Boolean value Yes/No No
   -njumble Number of times to randomise Integer 0 or more 0
   -seed Random number seed between 1 and 32767 (must be odd) Integer
   from 1 to 32767 1
   -outgrno Species number to use as outgroup Integer 0 or more 0
   -thresh Use threshold parsimony Toggle value Yes/No No
   -threshold Threshold value Number 1.000 or more 1.0
   -[no]trout Write out trees to tree file Toggle value Yes/No Yes
   -outtreefile Tree file name Output file
   -printdata Print data at start of run Boolean value Yes/No No
   -[no]progress Print indications of progress of run Boolean value
   Yes/No Yes
   -stepbox Print out steps in each site Boolean value Yes/No No
   -ancseq Print sequences at all nodes of tree Boolean value Yes/No No
   -[no]treeprint Print out tree Boolean value Yes/No Yes
   -[no]dotdiff Use dot differencing to display results Boolean value
   Yes/No Yes
   Advanced (Unprompted) qualifiers Allowed values Default
   (none)

Input file format

   fdnapars reads any normal sequence USAs.

  Input files for usage example

  File: dnapars.dat

   5   13
Alpha     AACGUGGCCAAAU
Beta      AAGGUCGCCAAAC
Gamma     CAUUUCGUCACAA
Delta     GGUAUUUCGGCCU
Epsilon   GGGAUCUCGGCCC

Output file format

   fdnapars output is standard: if option 1 is toggled on, the data is
   printed out, with the convention that "." means "the same as in the
   first species". Then comes a list of equally parsimonious trees. Each
   tree has branch lengths. These are computed using an algorithm
   published by Hochbaum and Pathria (1997) which I first heard of from
   Wayne Maddison who invented it independently of them. This algorithm
   averages the number of reconstructed changes of state over all sites a
   over all possible most parsimonious placements of the changes of state
   among branches. Note that it does not correct in any way for multiple
   changes that overlay each other. If option 2 is toggled on a table of
   the number of changes of state required in each character is also
   printed. If option 5 is toggled on, a table is printed out after each
   tree, showing for each branch whether there are known to be changes in
   the branch, and what the states are inferred to have been at the top
   end of the branch. This is a reconstruction of the ancestral sequences
   in the tree. If you choose option 5, a menu item "." appears which
   gives you the opportunity to turn off dot-differencing so that
   complete ancestral sequences are shown. If the inferred state is a "?"
   or one of the IUB ambiguity symbols, there will be multiple
   equally-parsimonious assignments of states; the user must work these
   out for themselves by hand. A "?" in the reconstructed states means
   that in addition to one or more bases, a deletion may or may not be
   present. If option 6 is left in its default state the trees found will
   be written to a tree file, so that they are available to be used in
   other programs. If the U (User Tree) option is used and more than one
   tree is supplied, the program also performs a statistical test of each
   of these trees against the best tree. This test, which is a version of
   the test proposed by Alan Templeton (1983) and evaluated in a test
   case by me (1985a). It is closely parallel to a test using log
   likelihood differences due to Kishino and Hasegawa (1989), and uses
   the mean and variance of step differences between trees, taken across
   sites. If the mean is more than 1.96 standard deviations different
   then the trees are declared significantly different. The program
   prints out a table of the steps for each tree, the differences of each
   from the best one, the variance of that quantity as determined by the
   step differences at individual sites, and a conclusion as to whether
   that tree is or is not significantly worse than the best one. If the U
   (User Tree) option is used and more than one tree is supplied, and the
   program is not told to assume autocorrelation between the rates at
   different sites, the program also performs a statistical test of each
   of these trees against the one with highest likelihood. If there are
   two user trees, this is a version of the test proposed by Alan
   Templeton (1983) and evaluated in a test case by me (1985a). It is
   closely parallel to a test using log likelihood differences due to
   Kishino and Hasegawa (1989) It uses the mean and variance of the
   differences in the number of steps between trees, taken across sites.
   If the two trees' means are more than 1.96 standard deviations
   different, then the trees are declared significantly different. If
   there are more than two trees, the test done is an extension of the
   KHT test, due to Shimodaira and Hasegawa (1999). They pointed out that
   a correction for the number of trees was necessary, and they
   introduced a resampling method to make this correction. In the version
   used here the variances and covariances of the sums of steps across
   sites are computed for all pairs of trees. To test whether the
   difference between each tree and the best one is larger than could
   have been expected if they all had the same expected number of steps,
   numbers of steps for all trees are sampled with these covariances and
   equal means (Shimodaira and Hasegawa's "least favorable hypothesis"),
   and a P value is computed from the fraction of times the difference
   between the tree's value and the lowest number of steps exceeds that
   actually observed. Note that this sampling needs random numbers, and
   so the program will prompt the user for a random number seed if one
   has not already been supplied. With the two-tree KHT test no random
   numbers are used. In either the KHT or the SH test the program prints
   out a table of the number of steps for each tree, the differences of
   each from the lowest one, the variance of that quantity as determined
   by the differences of the numbers of steps at individual sites, and a
   conclusion as to whether that tree is or is not significantly worse
   than the best one. Option 6 in the menu controls whether the tree
   estimated by the program is written onto a tree file. The default name
   of this output tree file is "outtree". If the U option is in effect,
   all the user-defined trees are written to the output tree file. If the
   program finds multiple trees tied for best, all of these are written
   out onto the output tree file. Each is followed by a numerical weight
   in square brackets (such as [0.25000]). This is needed when we use the
   trees to make a consensus tree of the results of bootstrapping or
   jackknifing, to avoid overrepresenting replicates that find many tied
   trees.

  Output files for usage example

  File: dnapars.fdnapars


DNA parsimony algorithm, version 3.6b


One most parsimonious tree found:


                                            +-----Epsilon
               +----------------------------3
  +------------2                            +-------Delta
  |            |
  |            +----------------Gamma
  |
  1----Beta
  |
  +---------Alpha


requires a total of     19.000

  between      and       length
  -------      ---       ------
     1           2       0.217949
     2           3       0.487179
     3      Epsilon      0.096154
     3      Delta        0.134615
     2      Gamma        0.275641
     1      Beta         0.076923
     1      Alpha        0.173077

  File: dnapars.treefile

(((Epsilon:0.09615,Delta:0.13462):0.48718,Gamma:0.27564):0.21795,
Beta:0.07692,Alpha:0.17308);

Data files

   None

Notes

   None.

References

   None.

Warnings

   None.

Diagnostic Error Messages

   None.

Exit status

   It always exits with status 0.

Known bugs

   None.

See also

   Program name                         Description
   ednacomp     DNA compatibility algorithm
   ednadist     Nucleic acid sequence Distance Matrix program
   ednainvar    Nucleic acid sequence Invariants method
   ednaml       Phylogenies from nucleic acid Maximum Likelihood
   ednamlk      Phylogenies from nucleic acid Maximum Likelihood with clock
   ednapars     DNA parsimony algorithm
   ednapenny    Penny algorithm for DNA
   eprotdist    Protein distance algorithm
   eprotpars    Protein parsimony algorithm
   erestml      Restriction site Maximum Likelihood method
   eseqboot     Bootstrapped sequences algorithm
   fdiscboot    Bootstrapped discrete sites algorithm
   fdnacomp     DNA compatibility algorithm
   fdnadist     Nucleic acid sequence Distance Matrix program
   fdnainvar    Nucleic acid sequence Invariants method
   fdnaml       Estimates nucleotide phylogeny by maximum likelihood
   fdnamlk      Estimates nucleotide phylogeny by maximum likelihood
   fdnamove     Interactive DNA parsimony
   fdnapenny    Penny algorithm for DNA
   fdolmove     Interactive Dollo or Polymorphism Parsimony
   ffreqboot    Bootstrapped genetic frequencies algorithm
   fproml       Protein phylogeny by maximum likelihood
   fpromlk      Protein phylogeny by maximum likelihood
   fprotdist    Protein distance algorithm
   fprotpars    Protein pasimony algorithm
   frestboot    Bootstrapped restriction sites algorithm
   frestdist    Distance matrix from restriction sites or fragments
   frestml      Restriction site maximum Likelihood method
   fseqboot     Bootstrapped sequences algorithm
   fseqbootall  Bootstrapped sequences algorithm

Author(s)

   This program is an EMBOSS conversion of a program written by Joe
   Felsenstein as part of his PHYLIP package.

   Although we take every care to ensure that the results of the EMBOSS
   version are identical to those from the original package, we recommend
   that you check your inputs give the same results in both versions
   before publication.

   Please report all bugs in the EMBOSS version to the EMBOSS bug team,
   not to the original author.

History

   Written (2004) - Joe Felsenstein, University of Washington.

   Converted (August 2004) to an EMBASSY program by the EMBOSS team.

Target users

   This program is intended to be used by everyone and everything, from
   naive users to embedded scripts.
