
                                  fdnamlk 



Function

   Estimates nucleotide phylogeny by maximum likelihood

Description

   Same as DNAML but assumes a molecular clock. The use of the two
   programs together permits a likelihood ratio test of the molecular
   clock hypothesis to be made.

   Estimates phylogenies from nucleotide sequences by maximum likelihood.
   The model employed allows for unequal expected frequencies of the four
   nucleotides, for unequal rates of transitions and transversions, and
   for different (prespecified) rates of change in different categories
   of sites, and also use of a Hidden Markov model of rates, with the
   program inferring which sites have which rates. This also allows
   gamma-distribution and gamma-plus-invariant sites distributions of
   rates across sites.

Algorithm

   This program implements the maximum likelihood method for DNA
   sequences under the constraint that the trees estimated must be
   consistent with a molecular clock. The molecular clock is the
   assumption that the tips of the tree are all equidistant, in branch
   length, from its root. This program is indirectly related to DNAML.
   Details of the algorithm are not yet published, but many aspects of it
   are similar to DNAML, and these are published in the paper by
   Felsenstein and Churchill (1996). The model of base substitution
   allows the expected frequencies of the four bases to be unequal,
   allows the expected frequencies of transitions and transversions to be
   unequal, and has several ways of allowing different rates of evolution
   at different sites.

   The assumptions of the model are:
    1. Each site in the sequence evolves independently.
    2. Different lineages evolve independently.
    3. There is a molecular clock.
    4. Each site undergoes substitution at an expected rate which is
       chosen from a series of rates (each with a probability of
       occurrence) which we specify.
    5. All relevant sites are included in the sequence, not just those
       that have changed or those that are "phylogenetically
       informative".
    6. A substitution consists of one of two sorts of events:
         1. The first kind of event consists of the replacement of the
            existing base by a base drawn from a pool of purines or a
            pool of pyrimidines (depending on whether the base being
            replaced was a purine or a pyrimidine). It can lead either to
            no change or to a transition.
         2. The second kind of event consists of the replacement of the
            existing base by a base drawn at random from a pool of bases
            at known frequencies, independently of the identity of the
            base which is being replaced. This could lead either to a no
            change, to a transition or to a transversion. The ratio of
            the two purines in the purine replacement pool is the same as
            their ratio in the overall pool, and similarly for the
            pyrimidines.
            The ratios of transitions to transversions can be set by the
            user. The substitution process can be diagrammed as follows:
            Suppose that you specified A, C, G, and T base frequencies of
            0.24, 0.28, 0.27, and 0.21.
               o First kind of event:
                 Determine whether the existing base is a purine or a
                 pyrimidine. Draw from the proper pool:
      Purine pool:                Pyrimidine pool:

     |               |            |               |
     |   0.4706 A    |            |   0.5714 C    |
     |   0.5294 G    |            |   0.4286 T    |
     | (ratio is     |            | (ratio is     |
     |  0.24 : 0.27) |            |  0.28 : 0.21) |
     |_______________|            |_______________|
               o Second kind of event:
                 Draw from the overall pool:

              |                  |
              |      0.24 A      |
              |      0.28 C      |
              |      0.27 G      |
              |      0.21 T      |
              |__________________|

   Note that if the existing base is, say, an A, the first kind of event
   has a 0.4706 probability of "replacing" it by another A. The second
   kind of event has a 0.24 chance of replacing it by another A. This
   rather disconcerting model is used because it has nice mathematical
   properties that make likelihood calculations far easier. A closely
   similar, but not precisely identical model having different rates of
   transitions and transversions has been used by Hasegawa et. al.
   (1985b). The transition probability formulas for the current model
   were given (with my permission) by Kishino and Hasegawa (1989).
   Another explanation is available in the paper by Felsenstein and
   Churchill (1996).

   Note the assumption that we are looking at all sites, including those
   that have not changed at all. It is important not to restrict
   attention to some sites based on whether or not they have changed;
   doing that would bias branch lengths by making them too long, and that
   in turn would cause the method to misinterpret the meaning of those
   sites that had changed.

   This program uses a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) method of inferring
   different rates of evolution at different sites. This was described in
   a paper by me and Gary Churchill (1996). It allows us to specify to
   the program that there will be a number of different possible
   evolutionary rates, what the prior probabilities of occurrence of each
   is, and what the average length of a patch of sites all having the
   same rate. The rates can also be chosen by the program to approximate
   a Gamma distribution of rates, or a Gamma distribution plus a class of
   invariant sites. The program computes the the likelihood by summing it
   over all possible assignments of rates to sites, weighting each by its
   prior probability of occurrence.

   For example, if we have used the C and A options (described below) to
   specify that there are three possible rates of evolution, 1.0, 2.4,
   and 0.0, that the prior probabilities of a site having these rates are
   0.4, 0.3, and 0.3, and that the average patch length (number of
   consecutive sites with the same rate) is 2.0, the program will sum the
   likelihood over all possibilities, but giving less weight to those
   that (say) assign all sites to rate 2.4, or that fail to have
   consecutive sites that have the same rate.

   The Hidden Markov Model framework for rate variation among sites was
   independently developed by Yang (1993, 1994, 1995). We have
   implemented a general scheme for a Hidden Markov Model of rates; we
   allow the rates and their prior probabilities to be specified
   arbitrarily by the user, or by a discrete approximation to a Gamma
   distribution of rates (Yang, 1995), or by a mixture of a Gamma
   distribution and a class of invariant sites.

   This feature effectively removes the artificial assumption that all
   sites have the same rate, and also means that we need not know in
   advance the identities of the sites that have a particular rate of
   evolution.

   Another layer of rate variation also is available. The user can assign
   categories of rates to each site (for example, we might want first,
   second, and third codon positions in a protein coding sequence to be
   three different categories. This is done with the categories input
   file and the C option. We then specify (using the menu) the relative
   rates of evolution of sites in the different categories. For example,
   we might specify that first, second, and third positions evolve at
   relative rates of 1.0, 0.8, and 2.7.

   If both user-assigned rate categories and Hidden Markov Model rates
   are allowed, the program assumes that the actual rate at a site is the
   product of the user-assigned category rate and the Hidden Markov Model
   regional rate. (This may not always make perfect biological sense: it
   would be more natural to assume some upper bound to the rate, as we
   have discussed in the Felsenstein and Churchill paper). Nevertheless
   you may want to use both types of rate variation.

Usage

Command line arguments

   Standard (Mandatory) qualifiers:
  [-sequence]          seqsetall  File containing one or more sequence
                                  alignments
  [-intreefile]        tree       (no help text) tree value
  [-outfile]           outfile    Output file name

   Additional (Optional) qualifiers (* if not always prompted):
   -ncategories        integer    Number of substitution rate categories
*  -rate               array      Rate for each category
*  -categories         properties File of substitution rate categories
   -weights            properties Weights file
   -ttratio            float      Transition/transversion ratio
   -[no]freqsfrom      toggle     Use empirical base frequencies from seqeunce
                                  input
*  -basefreq           array      Base frequencies for A C G T/U (use blanks
                                  to separate)
   -gamma              menu       Rate variation among sites
*  -gammacoefficient   float      Coefficient of variation of substitution
                                  rate among sites
*  -ngammacat          integer    Number of categories (1-9)
*  -invarcoefficient   float      Coefficient of variation of substitution
                                  rate among sites
*  -ninvarcat          integer    Number of categories (1-9) including one for
                                  invariant sites
*  -invarfrac          float      Fraction of invariant sites
*  -nhmmcategories     integer    Number of HMM rate categories
*  -hmmrates           array      HMM category rates
*  -hmmprobabilities   array      Probability for each HMM category
*  -adjsite            boolean    Rates at adjacent sites correlated
*  -lambda             float      Mean block length of sites having the same
                                  rate
*  -njumble            integer    Number of times to randomise
*  -seed               integer    Random number seed between 1 and 32767 (must
                                  be odd)
*  -global             boolean    Global rearrangements
*  -lengths            boolean    Use branch lengths from user trees
   -[no]trout          toggle     Write out trees to tree file
*  -outtreefile        outfile    Tree file name
   -printdata          boolean    Print data at start of run
   -[no]progress       boolean    Print indications of progress of run
   -[no]treeprint      boolean    Print out tree
   -hypstate           boolean    Reconstruct hypothetical sequence

   Advanced (Unprompted) qualifiers: (none)
   Associated qualifiers:

   "-sequence" associated qualifiers
   -sbegin1            integer    Start of each sequence to be used
   -send1              integer    End of each sequence to be used
   -sreverse1          boolean    Reverse (if DNA)
   -sask1              boolean    Ask for begin/end/reverse
   -snucleotide1       boolean    Sequence is nucleotide
   -sprotein1          boolean    Sequence is protein
   -slower1            boolean    Make lower case
   -supper1            boolean    Make upper case
   -sformat1           string     Input sequence format
   -sdbname1           string     Database name
   -sid1               string     Entryname
   -ufo1               string     UFO features
   -fformat1           string     Features format
   -fopenfile1         string     Features file name

   "-outfile" associated qualifiers
   -odirectory3        string     Output directory

   "-outtreefile" associated qualifiers
   -odirectory         string     Output directory

   General qualifiers:
   -auto               boolean    Turn off prompts
   -stdout             boolean    Write standard output
   -filter             boolean    Read standard input, write standard output
   -options            boolean    Prompt for standard and additional values
   -debug              boolean    Write debug output to program.dbg
   -verbose            boolean    Report some/full command line options
   -help               boolean    Report command line options. More
                                  information on associated and general
                                  qualifiers can be found with -help -verbose
   -warning            boolean    Report warnings
   -error              boolean    Report errors
   -fatal              boolean    Report fatal errors
   -die                boolean    Report deaths


   Standard (Mandatory) qualifiers Allowed values Default
   [-sequence]
   (Parameter 1) File containing one or more sequence alignments Readable
   sets of sequences
   [-intreefile]
   (Parameter 2) (no help text) tree value Phylogenetic tree
   [-outfile]
   (Parameter 3) Output file name Output file <sequence>.fdnamlk
   Additional (Optional) qualifiers Allowed values Default
   -ncategories Number of substitution rate categories Integer from 1 to
   9 1
   -rate Rate for each category List of floating point numbers
   -categories File of substitution rate categories Property value(s)
   -weights Weights file Property value(s)
   -ttratio Transition/transversion ratio Number 0.001 or more 2.0
   -[no]freqsfrom Use empirical base frequencies from seqeunce input
   Toggle value Yes/No Yes
   -basefreq Base frequencies for A C G T/U (use blanks to separate) List
   of floating point numbers 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25
   -gamma Rate variation among sites
   g (Gamma distributed rates)
   i (Gamma+invariant sites)
   h (User defined HMM of rates)
   n (Constant rate)
   Constant rate
   -gammacoefficient Coefficient of variation of substitution rate among
   sites Number 0.001 or more 1
   -ngammacat Number of categories (1-9) Integer from 1 to 9 1
   -invarcoefficient Coefficient of variation of substitution rate among
   sites Number 0.001 or more 1
   -ninvarcat Number of categories (1-9) including one for invariant
   sites Integer from 1 to 9 1
   -invarfrac Fraction of invariant sites Number from 0.000 to 1.000 0.0
   -nhmmcategories Number of HMM rate categories Integer from 1 to 9 1
   -hmmrates HMM category rates List of floating point numbers 1.0
   -hmmprobabilities Probability for each HMM category List of floating
   point numbers 1.0
   -adjsite Rates at adjacent sites correlated Boolean value Yes/No No
   -lambda Mean block length of sites having the same rate Number 1.000
   or more 1.0
   -njumble Number of times to randomise Integer 0 or more 0
   -seed Random number seed between 1 and 32767 (must be odd) Integer
   from 1 to 32767 1
   -global Global rearrangements Boolean value Yes/No No
   -lengths Use branch lengths from user trees Boolean value Yes/No No
   -[no]trout Write out trees to tree file Toggle value Yes/No Yes
   -outtreefile Tree file name Output file
   -printdata Print data at start of run Boolean value Yes/No No
   -[no]progress Print indications of progress of run Boolean value
   Yes/No Yes
   -[no]treeprint Print out tree Boolean value Yes/No Yes
   -hypstate Reconstruct hypothetical sequence Boolean value Yes/No No
   Advanced (Unprompted) qualifiers Allowed values Default
   (none)

Input file format

   fdnamlk reads any normal sequence USAs.

Output file format

   fdnamlk output starts by giving the number of species, the number of
   sites, and the base frequencies for A, C, G, and T that have been
   specified. It then prints out the transition/transversion ratio that
   was specified or used by default. It also uses the base frequencies to
   compute the actual transition/transversion ratio implied by the
   parameter.

   If the R (HMM rates) option is used a table of the relative rates of
   expected substitution at each category of sites is printed, as well as
   the probabilities of each of those rates.

   There then follow the data sequences, if the user has selected the
   menu option to print them out, with the base sequences printed in
   groups of ten bases along the lines of the Genbank and EMBL formats.
   The trees found are printed as a rooted tree topology. The internal
   nodes are numbered arbitrarily for the sake of identification. The
   number of trees evaluated so far and the log likelihood of the tree
   are also given. The branch lengths in the diagram are roughly
   proportional to the estimated branch lengths, except that very short
   branches are printed out at least three characters in length so that
   the connections can be seen.

   A table is printed showing the length of each tree segment, and the
   time (in units of expected nucleotide substitutions per site) of each
   fork in the tree, measured from the root of the tree. I have not
   attempted in include code for approximate confidence limits on branch
   points, as I have done for branch lengths in DNAML, both because of
   the extreme crudeness of that test, and because the variation of times
   for different forks would be highly correlated.

   The log likelihood printed out with the final tree can be used to
   perform various likelihood ratio tests. One can, for example, compare
   runs with different values of the expected transition/transversion
   ratio to determine which value is the maximum likelihood estimate, and
   what is the allowable range of values (using a likelihood ratio test,
   which you will find described in mathematical statistics books). One
   could also estimate the base frequencies in the same way. Both of
   these, particularly the latter, require multiple runs of the program
   to evaluate different possible values, and this might get expensive.

   This program makes possible a (reasonably) legitimate statistical test
   of the molecular clock. To do such a test, run DNAML and DNAMLK on the
   same data. If the trees obtained are of the same topology (when
   considered as unrooted), it is legitimate to compare their likelihoods
   by the likelihood ratio test. In DNAML the likelihood has been
   computed by estimating 2n-3 branch lengths, if their are n tips on the
   tree. In DNAMLK it has been computed by estimating n-1 branching times
   (in effect, n-1 branch lengths). The difference in the number of
   parameters is (2n-3)-(n-1) = n-2. To perform the test take the
   difference in log likelihoods between the two runs (DNAML should be
   the higher of the two, barring numerical iteration difficulties) and
   double it. Look this up on a chi-square distribution with n-2 degrees
   of freedom. If the result is significant, the log likelihood has been
   significantly increased by allowing all 2n-3 branch lengths to be
   estimated instead of just n-1, and molecular clock may be rejected.

   If the U (User Tree) option is used and more than one tree is
   supplied, and the program is not told to assume autocorrelation
   between the rates at different sites, the program also performs a
   statistical test of each of these trees against the one with highest
   likelihood. If there are two user trees, the test done is one which is
   due to Kishino and Hasegawa (1989), a version of a test originally
   introduced by Templeton (1983). In this implementation it uses the
   mean and variance of log-likelihood differences between trees, taken
   across sites. If the two trees' means are more than 1.96 standard
   deviations different then the trees are declared significantly
   different. This use of the empirical variance of log-likelihood
   differences is more robust and nonparametric than the classical
   likelihood ratio test, and may to some extent compensate for the any
   lack of realism in the model underlying this program.

   If there are more than two trees, the test done is an extension of the
   KHT test, due to Shimodaira and Hasegawa (1999). They pointed out that
   a correction for the number of trees was necessary, and they
   introduced a resampling method to make this correction. In the version
   used here the variances and covariances of the sum of log likelihoods
   across sites are computed for all pairs of trees. To test whether the
   difference between each tree and the best one is larger than could
   have been expected if they all had the same expected log-likelihood,
   log-likelihoods for all trees are sampled with these covariances and
   equal means (Shimodaira and Hasegawa's "least favorable hypothesis"),
   and a P value is computed from the fraction of times the difference
   between the tree's value and the highest log-likelihood exceeds that
   actually observed. Note that this sampling needs random numbers, and
   so the program will prompt the user for a random number seed if one
   has not already been supplied. With the two-tree KHT test no random
   numbers are used.

   In either the KHT or the SH test the program prints out a table of the
   log-likelihoods of each tree, the differences of each from the highest
   one, the variance of that quantity as determined by the log-likelihood
   differences at individual sites, and a conclusion as to whether that
   tree is or is not significantly worse than the best one. However the
   test is not available if we assume that there is autocorrelation of
   rates at neighboring sites (option A) and is not done in those cases.

   The branch lengths printed out are scaled in terms of expected numbers
   of substitutions, counting both transitions and transversions but not
   replacements of a base by itself, and scaled so that the average rate
   of change, averaged over all sites analyzed, is set to 1.0 if there
   are multiple categories of sites. This means that whether or not there
   are multiple categories of sites, the expected fraction of change for
   very small branches is equal to the branch length. Of course, when a
   branch is twice as long this does not mean that there will be twice as
   much net change expected along it, since some of the changes occur in
   the same site and overlie or even reverse each other. The branch
   length estimates here are in terms of the expected underlying numbers
   of changes. That means that a branch of length 0.26 is 26 times as
   long as one which would show a 1% difference between the nucleotide
   sequences at the beginning and end of the branch. But we would not
   expect the sequences at the beginning and end of the branch to be 26%
   different, as there would be some overlaying of changes.

   Because of limitations of the numerical algorithm, branch length
   estimates of zero will often print out as small numbers such as
   0.00001. If you see a branch length that small, it is really estimated
   to be of zero length.

   Another possible source of confusion is the existence of negative
   values for the log likelihood. This is not really a problem; the log
   likelihood is not a probability but the logarithm of a probability.
   When it is negative it simply means that the corresponding probability
   is less than one (since we are seeing its logarithm). The log
   likelihood is maximized by being made more positive: -30.23 is worse
   than -29.14.

   At the end of the output, if the R option is in effect with multiple
   HMM rates, the program will print a list of what site categories
   contributed the most to the final likelihood. This combination of HMM
   rate categories need not have contributed a majority of the
   likelihood, just a plurality. Still, it will be helpful as a view of
   where the program infers that the higher and lower rates are. Note
   that the use in this calculations of the prior probabilities of
   different rates, and the average patch length, gives this inference a
   "smoothed" appearance: some other combination of rates might make a
   greater contribution to the likelihood, but be discounted because it
   conflicts with this prior information. See the example output below to
   see what this printout of rate categories looks like.

   A second list will also be printed out, showing for each site which
   rate accounted for the highest fraction of the likelihood. If the
   fraction of the likelihood accounted for is less than 95%, a dot is
   printed instead.

   Option 3 in the menu controls whether the tree is printed out into the
   output file. This is on by default, and usually you will want to leave
   it this way. However for runs with multiple data sets such as
   bootstrapping runs, you will primarily be interested in the trees
   which are written onto the output tree file, rather than the trees
   printed on the output file. To keep the output file from becoming too
   large, it may be wisest to use option 3 to prevent trees being printed
   onto the output file.

   Option 4 in the menu controls whether the tree estimated by the
   program is written onto a tree file. The default name of this output
   tree file is "outtree". If the U option is in effect, all the
   user-defined trees are written to the output tree file.

   Option 5 in the menu controls whether ancestral states are estimated
   at each node in the tree. If it is in effect, a table of ancestral
   sequences is printed out (including the sequences in the tip species
   which are the input sequences). In that table, if a site has a base
   which accounts for more than 95% of the likelihood, it is printed in
   capital letters (A rather than a). If the best nucleotide accounts for
   less than 50% of the likelihood, the program prints out an ambiguity
   code (such as M for "A or C") for the set of nucleotides which, taken
   together, account for more half of the likelihood. The ambiguity codes
   are listed in the sequence programs documentation file. One limitation
   of the current version of the program is that when there are multiple
   HMM rates (option R) the reconstructed nucleotides are based on only
   the single assignment of rates to sites which accounts for the largest
   amount of the likelihood. Thus the assessment of 95% of the
   likelihood, in tabulating the ancestral states, refers to 95% of the
   likelihood that is accounted for by that particular combination of
   rates.

Data files

   None

Notes

   None.

References

   None.

Warnings

   None.

Diagnostic Error Messages

   None.

Exit status

   It always exits with status 0.

Known bugs

   None.

See also

   Program name Description
   ednacomp DNA compatibility algorithm
   ednadist Nucleic acid sequence Distance Matrix program
   ednainvar Nucleic acid sequence Invariants method
   ednaml Estimates phylogenies from nucleic acid sequence Maximum
   Likelihood
   ednamlk Estimates phylogenies from nucleic acid sequence Maximum
   Likelihood with molecular clock
   ednapars DNA parsimony algorithm
   ednapenny Penny algorithm for DNA
   eprotdist Protein distance algorithm
   eprotpars Protein parsimony algorithm
   erestml Restriction site Maximum Likelihood method
   eseqboot Bootstrapped sequences algorithm
   fdiscboot Bootstrapped discrete sites algorithm
   fdnacomp DNA compatibility algorithm
   fdnadist Nucleic acid sequence Distance Matrix program
   fdnainvar Nucleic acid sequence Invariants method
   fdnaml Estimates nucleotide phylogeny by maximum likelihood
   fdnamove Interactive DNA parsimony
   fdnapars DNA parsimony algorithm
   fdnapenny Penny algorithm for DNA
   fdolmove Interactive Dollo or Polymorphism Parsimony
   ffreqboot Bootstrapped genetic frequencies algorithm
   fproml Protein phylogeny by maximum likelihood
   fpromlk Protein phylogeny by maximum likelihood
   fprotdist Protein distance algorithm
   fprotpars Protein pasimony algorithm
   frestboot Bootstrapped restriction sites algorithm
   frestdist Computes distance matrix from restriction sites or fragments
   frestml Restriction site maximum Likelihood method
   fseqboot Bootstrapped sequences algorithm
   fseqbootall Bootstrapped sequences algorithm

Author(s)

   This program is an EMBOSS conversion of a program written by Joe
   Felsenstein as part of his PHYLIP package.

   Although we take every care to ensure that the results of the EMBOSS
   version are identical to those from the original package, we recommend
   that you check your inputs give the same results in both versions
   before publication.

   Please report all bugs in the EMBOSS version to the EMBOSS bug team,
   not to the original author.

History

   Written (2004) - Joe Felsenstein, University of Washington.

   Converted (August 2004) to an EMBASSY program by the EMBOSS team.

Target users

   This program is intended to be used by everyone and everything, from
   naive users to embedded scripts.
