
                                   funky 
                                      
   
   
Function

   Reads clean coordinate files and writes file of protein-heterogen
   contact data
   
Description

   This is part of Jon Ison's protein structure analysis package.
   
   This package is still being developed.
   
   Please ignore this program until further details can be documented.
   
   All further queries should go to Jon Ison. (Jon Ison)
   
Usage

   Here is a sample session with funky:

% funky

Command line arguments

   Mandatory qualifiers:
  [-prot]              string     Location of protein coordinate files for
                                  input (embl-like format)
  [-protextn]          string     Extension of protein coordinate files
                                  (embl-like format)
  [-dom]               string     Location of domain coordinate files for
                                  input (embl-like format)
  [-domextn]           string     Extension of domain coordinate files
                                  (embl-like format)
   -dic                infile     Name of dictionary of heterogen groups
   -scop               infile     Name of scop file for input (embl-like
                                  format)
   -vdwf               infile     Name of data file with van der Waals radii
   -thresh             float      Threshold contact distance

   Optional qualifiers: (none)
   Advanced qualifiers:
   -outf               outfile    Name of output file
   -logf               outfile    Name of log file

   General qualifiers:
  -help                boolean    Report command line options. More
                                  information on associated and general
                                  qualifiers can be found with -help -verbose
   

   Mandatory qualifiers Allowed values Default
   [-prot]
   (Parameter 1) Location of protein coordinate files for input
   (embl-like format) Any string is accepted ./
   [-protextn]
   (Parameter 2) Extension of protein coordinate files (embl-like format)
   Any string is accepted .pxyz
   [-dom]
   (Parameter 3) Location of domain coordinate files for input (embl-like
   format) Any string is accepted ./
   [-domextn]
   (Parameter 4) Extension of domain coordinate files (embl-like format)
   Any string is accepted .pxyz
   -dic Name of dictionary of heterogen groups Input file Ehet.dat
   -scop Name of scop file for input (embl-like format) Input file
   Escop.dat
   -vdwf Name of data file with van der Waals radii Input file Evdw.dat
   -thresh Threshold contact distance Any numeric value 1.0
   Optional qualifiers Allowed values Default
   (none)
   Advanced qualifiers Allowed values Default
   -outf Name of output file Output file funky.out
   -logf Name of log file Output file funky.log
   
Input file format

Output file format

Data files

Notes

   None.
   
References

   None.
   
Warnings

   None.
   
Diagnostic Error Messages

   None.
   
Exit status

   It always exits with status 0.
   
Known bugs

   None.
   
See also

   Program name Description
   aaindexextract Extract data from AAINDEX
   cutgextract Extract data from CUTG
   domainer Reads protein coordinate files and writes domains coordinate
   files
   groups Removes redundant hits from a scop families file
   hetparse Converts raw dictionary of heterogen groups to a file in
   embl-like format
   nrscope Converts redundant EMBL-format SCOP file to non-redundant one
   pdbparse Parses pdb files and writes cleaned-up protein coordinate
   files
   pdbtosp Convert raw swissprot:pdb equivalence file to embl-like format
   printsextract Extract data from PRINTS
   prosextract Builds the PROSITE motif database for patmatmotifs to
   search
   rebaseextract Extract data from REBASE
   scope Convert raw scop classification file to embl-like format
   scopnr Removes redundant domains from a scop classification file
   scopparse Converts raw scop classification files to a file in
   embl-like format
   scopseqs Adds pdb and swissprot sequence records to a scop
   classification file
   tfextract Extract data from TRANSFAC
   
Author(s)

   This application was written by Jon Ison (jison@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk)
   
History

   Written (date) - author.
   
Target users

   This program is intended to be used by everyone and everything, from
   naive users to embedded scripts.
   
Comments
