
                                 hetparse 
                                      
   
   
Function

   Converts raw dictionary of heterogen groups to a file in embl-like
   format
   
Description

   This is part of Jon Ison's protein structure analysis package.
   
   This package is still being developed.
   
   Please ignore this program until further details can be documented.
   
   All further queries should go to Jon Ison. (Jon Ison)
   
Usage

   Here is a sample session with hetparse:

% hetparse

Command line arguments

   Mandatory qualifiers (* if not always prompted):
  [-inf]               infile     Name of input file (raw dictionary of
                                  heterogen groups)
   -dogrep             boolean    Search a directory of files with keywords?
*  -path               string     Directory to search with keywords
*  -extn               string     Exension of files to search in above
                                  directory
  [-outf]              outfile    Name of output file (embl format)

   Optional qualifiers: (none)
   Advanced qualifiers: (none)
   General qualifiers:
  -help                boolean    Report command line options. More
                                  information on associated and general
                                  qualifiers can be found with -help -verbose
   

   Mandatory qualifiers Allowed values Default
   [-inf]
   (Parameter 1) Name of input file (raw dictionary of heterogen groups)
   Input file Required
   -dogrep Search a directory of files with keywords? Yes/No No
   -path Directory to search with keywords Any string is accepted ./
   -extn Exension of files to search in above directory Any string is
   accepted .ent
   [-outf]
   (Parameter 2) Name of output file (embl format) Output file
   <sequence>.hetparse
   Optional qualifiers Allowed values Default
   (none)
   Advanced qualifiers Allowed values Default
   (none)
   
Input file format

Output file format

Data files

Notes

   None.
   
References

   None.
   
Warnings

   None.
   
Diagnostic Error Messages

   None.
   
Exit status

   It always exits with status 0.
   
Known bugs

   None.
   
See also

   Program name Description
   aaindexextract Extract data from AAINDEX
   cutgextract Extract data from CUTG
   domainer Reads protein coordinate files and writes domains coordinate
   files
   funky Reads clean coordinate files and writes file of
   protein-heterogen contact data
   groups Removes redundant hits from a scop families file
   nrscope Converts redundant EMBL-format SCOP file to non-redundant one
   pdbparse Parses pdb files and writes cleaned-up protein coordinate
   files
   pdbtosp Convert raw swissprot:pdb equivalence file to embl-like format
   printsextract Extract data from PRINTS
   prosextract Builds the PROSITE motif database for patmatmotifs to
   search
   rebaseextract Extract data from REBASE
   scope Convert raw scop classification file to embl-like format
   scopnr Removes redundant domains from a scop classification file
   scopparse Converts raw scop classification files to a file in
   embl-like format
   scopseqs Adds pdb and swissprot sequence records to a scop
   classification file
   tfextract Extract data from TRANSFAC
   
Author(s)

   This application was written by Jon Ison (jison@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk)
   
History

   Written (date) - author.
   
Target users

   This program is intended to be used by everyone and everything, from
   naive users to embedded scripts.
   
Comments
