
                                 interface 
                                      
   
   
Function

   Reads coordinate files and writes files of inter-chain residue-residue
   contact data
   
Description

   This is part of Jon Ison's protein structure analysis package.
   
   This package is still being developed.
   
   Please ignore this program until further details can be documented.
   
   All further queries should go to Jon Ison. (Jon Ison)
   
Usage

   Here is a sample session with interface:

% interface

Command line arguments

   Mandatory qualifiers:
  [-in]                infile     Name of protein coordinate file for input
                                  (embl format)
   -vdwf               string     Name of data file with van der Waals radii
   -thresh             float      Threshold contact distance
  [-out]               outfile    Name of contact file for output
   -conerrf            outfile    Name of log file for the build

   Optional qualifiers:
   -ignore             float      If any two atoms from two different residues
                                  are at least this distance apart then no
                                  futher inter-atomic contacts will be checked
                                  for for that residue pair . This speeds the
                                  calculation up considerably.

   Advanced qualifiers: (none)
   General qualifiers:
  -help                boolean    Report command line options. More
                                  information on associated and general
                                  qualifiers can be found with -help -verbose
   

   Mandatory qualifiers Allowed values Default
   [-in]
   (Parameter 1) Name of protein coordinate file for input (embl format)
   Input file Required
   -vdwf Name of data file with van der Waals radii Any string is
   accepted Evdw.dat
   -thresh Threshold contact distance Any numeric value 1.0
   [-out]
   (Parameter 2) Name of contact file for output Output file test.con
   -conerrf Name of log file for the build Output file interface.log
   Optional qualifiers Allowed values Default
   -ignore If any two atoms from two different residues are at least this
   distance apart then no futher inter-atomic contacts will be checked
   for for that residue pair . This speeds the calculation up
   considerably. Any numeric value 20.0
   Advanced qualifiers Allowed values Default
   (none)
   
Input file format

Output file format

Data files

Notes

   None.
   
References

   None.
   
Warnings

   None.
   
Diagnostic Error Messages

   None.
   
Exit status

   It always exits with status 0.
   
Known bugs

   None.
   
See also

   Program name Description
   contacts Reads coordinate files and writes files of intra-chain
   residue-residue contact data
   dichet Parse dictionary of heterogen groups
   hmmgen Generates a hidden Markov model for each alignment in a
   directory
   profgen Generates various profiles for each alignment in a directory
   psiblasts Runs PSI-BLAST given scopalign alignments
   scopalign Generate alignments for families in a scop classification
   file by using STAMP
   scoprep Reorder scop classificaiton file so that the representative
   structure of each family is given first
   scopreso Removes low resolution domains from a scop classification
   file
   seqalign Generate extended alignments for families in a scop families
   file by using CLUSTALW with seed alignments
   seqsearch Generate files of hits for families in a scop classification
   file by using PSI-BLAST with seed alignments
   seqsort Reads multiple files of hits and writes a non-ambiguous file
   of hits (scop families file) plus a validation file
   seqwords Generate file of hits for scop families by searching
   swissprot with keywords
   siggen Generates a sparse protein signature from an alignment and
   residue contact data
   sigscan Scans a signature against swissprot and writes a signature
   hits files
   
Author(s)

   This application was written by Jon Ison (jison@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk)
   
History

   Written (date) - author.
   
Target users

   This program is intended to be used by everyone and everything, from
   naive users to embedded scripts.
   
Comments
