
                                  scopnr 
                                      
   
   
Function

   Removes redundant domains from a scop classification file
   
Description

   This is part of Jon Ison's protein structure analysis package.
   
   This package is still being developed.
   
   Please ignore this program until further details can be documented.
   
   All further queries should go to Jon Ison. (Jon Ison)
   
Usage

   Here is a sample session with scopnr:

% scopnr

Command line arguments

   Mandatory qualifiers (* if not always prompted):
  [-scopin]            infile     Name of scop classification file (embl
                                  format input)
   -mode               menu       Select number
*  -thresh             float      The % sequence identity redundancy threshold
*  -threshlow          float      The % sequence identity redundancy threshold
                                  (lower limit)
*  -threshup           float      The % sequence identity redundancy threshold
                                  (upper limit)
  [-scopout]           outfile    Name of non-redundant scop classification
                                  file (embl format output)
   -errf               outfile    Name of log file for the build

   Optional qualifiers:
   -datafile           matrixf    This is the scoring matrix file used when
                                  comparing sequences.
   -gapopen            float      The gap insertion penalty is the score taken
                                  away when a gap is created. The best value
                                  depends on the choice of comparison matrix.
                                  The default value assumes you are using the
                                  EBLOSUM62 matrix for protein sequences, and
                                  the EDNAFULL matrix for nucleotide
                                  sequences.
   -gapextend          float      The gap extension, penalty is added to the
                                  standard gap penalty for each base or
                                  residue in the gap. This is how long gaps
                                  are penalized. Usually you will expect a few
                                  long gaps rather than many short gaps, so
                                  the gap extension penalty should be lower
                                  than the gap penalty. An exception is where
                                  one or both sequences are single reads with
                                  possible sequencing errors in which case you
                                  would expect many single base gaps. You can
                                  get this result by setting the gap open
                                  penalty to zero (or very low) and using the
                                  gap extension penalty to control gap
                                  scoring.

   Advanced qualifiers: (none)
   General qualifiers:
  -help                boolean    Report command line options. More
                                  information on associated and general
                                  qualifiers can be found with -help -verbose
   

   Mandatory qualifiers Allowed values Default
   [-scopin]
   (Parameter 1) Name of scop classification file (embl format input)
   Input file Escop.dat
   -mode Select number
   1 (Remove redundancy at a single threshold % sequence similarity)
   2 (Remove redundancy outside a range of acceptable threshold %
   similarity)
   1
   -thresh The % sequence identity redundancy threshold Any numeric value
   95.0
   -threshlow The % sequence identity redundancy threshold (lower limit)
   Any numeric value 30.0
   -threshup The % sequence identity redundancy threshold (upper limit)
   Any numeric value 90.0
   [-scopout]
   (Parameter 2) Name of non-redundant scop classification file (embl
   format output) Output file Escop_90.dat
   -errf Name of log file for the build Output file scopnr.log
   Optional qualifiers Allowed values Default
   -datafile This is the scoring matrix file used when comparing
   sequences. Comparison matrix file in EMBOSS data path EBLOSUM62
   -gapopen The gap insertion penalty is the score taken away when a gap
   is created. The best value depends on the choice of comparison matrix.
   The default value assumes you are using the EBLOSUM62 matrix for
   protein sequences, and the EDNAFULL matrix for nucleotide sequences.
   Floating point number from 1.0 to 100.0 10.0 for any sequence
   -gapextend The gap extension, penalty is added to the standard gap
   penalty for each base or residue in the gap. This is how long gaps are
   penalized. Usually you will expect a few long gaps rather than many
   short gaps, so the gap extension penalty should be lower than the gap
   penalty. An exception is where one or both sequences are single reads
   with possible sequencing errors in which case you would expect many
   single base gaps. You can get this result by setting the gap open
   penalty to zero (or very low) and using the gap extension penalty to
   control gap scoring. Floating point number from 0.0 to 10.0 0.5 for
   any sequence
   Advanced qualifiers Allowed values Default
   (none)
   
Input file format

Output file format

Data files

Notes

   None.
   
References

   None.
   
Warnings

   None.
   
Diagnostic Error Messages

   None.
   
Exit status

   It always exits with status 0.
   
Known bugs

   None.
   
See also

   Program name Description
   aaindexextract Extract data from AAINDEX
   cutgextract Extract data from CUTG
   domainer Reads protein coordinate files and writes domains coordinate
   files
   funky Reads clean coordinate files and writes file of
   protein-heterogen contact data
   groups Removes redundant hits from a scop families file
   hetparse Converts raw dictionary of heterogen groups to a file in
   embl-like format
   nrscope Converts redundant EMBL-format SCOP file to non-redundant one
   pdbparse Parses pdb files and writes cleaned-up protein coordinate
   files
   pdbtosp Convert raw swissprot:pdb equivalence file to embl-like format
   printsextract Extract data from PRINTS
   prosextract Builds the PROSITE motif database for patmatmotifs to
   search
   rebaseextract Extract data from REBASE
   scope Convert raw scop classification file to embl-like format
   scopparse Converts raw scop classification files to a file in
   embl-like format
   scopseqs Adds pdb and swissprot sequence records to a scop
   classification file
   tfextract Extract data from TRANSFAC
   
Author(s)

   This application was written by Jon Ison (jison@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk)
   
History

   Written (date) - author.
   
Target users

   This program is intended to be used by everyone and everything, from
   naive users to embedded scripts.
   
Comments
