
                                 seqalign 
                                      
   
   
Function

   Generate extended alignments for families in a scop families file by
   using CLUSTALW with seed alignments
   
Description

   This is part of Jon Ison's protein structure analysis package.
   
   This package is still being developed.
   
   Please ignore this program until further details can be documented.
   
   All further queries should go to Jon Ison. (Jon Ison)
   
Usage

   Here is a sample session with seqalign:

% seqalign

Command line arguments

   Mandatory qualifiers:
  [-inpath]            string     Location of scop alignment files (input)
  [-extn]              string     Extention of scop alignment files
   -scopin             infile     Name of scop hits file (input)
  [-outpath]           string     Location of extended alignment files (Escop
                                  format output)
  [-outextn]           string     Extention of extended alignment files

   Optional qualifiers: (none)
   Advanced qualifiers: (none)
   General qualifiers:
  -help                boolean    Report command line options. More
                                  information on associated and general
                                  qualifiers can be found with -help -verbose
   

   Mandatory qualifiers Allowed values Default
   [-inpath]
   (Parameter 1) Location of scop alignment files (input) Any string is
   accepted ./
   [-extn]
   (Parameter 2) Extention of scop alignment files Any string is accepted
   .align
   -scopin Name of scop hits file (input) Input file Required
   [-outpath]
   (Parameter 3) Location of extended alignment files (Escop format
   output) Any string is accepted ./
   [-outextn]
   (Parameter 4) Extention of extended alignment files Any string is
   accepted .ealign
   Optional qualifiers Allowed values Default
   (none)
   Advanced qualifiers Allowed values Default
   (none)
   
Input file format

Output file format

Data files

Notes

   None.
   
References

   None.
   
Warnings

   None.
   
Diagnostic Error Messages

   None.
   
Exit status

   It always exits with status 0.
   
Known bugs

   None.
   
See also

   Program name Description
   contacts Reads coordinate files and writes files of intra-chain
   residue-residue contact data
   dichet Parse dictionary of heterogen groups
   hmmgen Generates a hidden Markov model for each alignment in a
   directory
   interface Reads coordinate files and writes files of inter-chain
   residue-residue contact data
   profgen Generates various profiles for each alignment in a directory
   psiblasts Runs PSI-BLAST given scopalign alignments
   scopalign Generate alignments for families in a scop classification
   file by using STAMP
   scoprep Reorder scop classificaiton file so that the representative
   structure of each family is given first
   scopreso Removes low resolution domains from a scop classification
   file
   seqsearch Generate files of hits for families in a scop classification
   file by using PSI-BLAST with seed alignments
   seqsort Reads multiple files of hits and writes a non-ambiguous file
   of hits (scop families file) plus a validation file
   seqwords Generate file of hits for scop families by searching
   swissprot with keywords
   siggen Generates a sparse protein signature from an alignment and
   residue contact data
   sigscan Scans a signature against swissprot and writes a signature
   hits files
   
Author(s)

   This application was written by Jon Ison (jison@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk)
   
History

   Written (date) - author.
   
Target users

   This program is intended to be used by everyone and everything, from
   naive users to embedded scripts.
   
Comments
