
                               EMBOSS: seqret
     _________________________________________________________________
   
                                Program seqret
                                       
Function

   Reads and writes (returns) sequences
   
Description

   The simplicity of the above description of this program greatly
   understates the rich functionality of this program.
   
   Because EMBOSS programs can take a wide range of qualifiers that
   slightly change the behaviour of the program when reading or writing a
   sequence, this program can do many more things than simply "read and
   write a sequence".
   
   seqret can read a sequence or many sequences from databases, files,
   files of sequence names, the command-line or the output of other
   programs and then can write them to files, the screen or pass them to
   other programs. Because it can read in a sequence from a database and
   write it to a file, seqret is a program for extracting sequences from
   databases. Because it can write the sequence to the screen, seqret is
   a program for displaying sequences.
   
   seqret can read sequences in any of a wide range of standard sequence
   formats. You can specify the input and output formats being used. If
   you don't specify the input format, seqret will try a set of possible
   formats until it reads it in successfully. Because you can specify the
   output sequence format, seqret is a program to reformat a sequence.
   
   seqret can read in the reverse complement of a nucleic acid sequence.
   It therefore is a program for producing the reverse complement of a
   sequence.
   
   seqret can read in a sequence whose begin and end positions you have
   specified and write out that fragment. It is therefore a utility for
   doing simple extraction of a region of a sequence.
   
   seqret can change the case of the sequence being read in to upper or
   to lower case. It is therefore a simple sequence beautification
   utility.
   
   seqret can do any combination of the above functions.
   
   The sequence input and output specification of this (and many other
   EMBOSS programs) is described as being a Uniform Sequence Address.
   
   The Uniform Sequence Address, or USA, is a somewhat tongue-in-cheek
   reference to a URL-style sequence naming used by all EMBOSS
   applications.
   
   The USA is a very flexible way of specifying one or more sequences
   from a variety of sources and includes sequence files, database
   queries and external applications.
   
   The basic USA syntax is one of:
     * "file"
     * "file:entry"
     * "format::file"
     * "format::file:entry"
     * "database:entry"
     * "database"
     * "@file"
       
   Note that ':' separates the name of a file containing many possible
   entries from the specific name of a sequence entry in that file. It
   also separates the name of a database from an entry in that database
   
   Note also that '::' separates the specified format of a file from the
   name of the file. Normally the format can be omitted, in which case
   the program will attempt to identify the correct format when reading
   the sequence in and will default to using FASTA format when writing
   the sequence out.
   
   Valid names of the databases set up in your local implementation of
   EMBOSS can be seen by using the program 'showdb'.
   
   Database queries, and individual entries in files that have more than
   one sequence entry, use wildcards of "?" for any character and "*" for
   any string of characters. There are some problems with the Unix shell
   catching these characters so they do need to be hidden in quotes or
   preceded by a backslash on the Unix command line, (for example
   "embl:hs\*")
   
   The output USA name 'stdout' is special. It makes the output go to the
   device 'standard output'. This is the screen, by default.
   
  Example USAs
  
   The following are valid USAs for sequences:
   
   USA Description
   xxx.seq A sequence file "xxx.seq" in any format
   fasta::xxx.seq A sequence file "xxx.seq" in fasta format
   gcg::egmsmg.gcg A sequence file "egmsmg.gcg" in GCG 9 format
   egmsmg.gcg -sformat=gcg A sequence file "egmsmg.gcg" in GCG 9 format
   embl::paamir.em A sequence file "paamir.em" in EMBL format
   embl:paamir EMBL entry PAAMIR, using whatever access method is defined
   locally for the EMBL database
   embl:X13776 EMBL entry X13776, using whatever access method is defined
   locally for the EMBL database and searching by accession number and
   entry name (X13776 is the accession number in this case)
   embl-acc:X13776 EMBL entry X13776, using whatever access method is
   defined locally for the EMBL database and searching by accession
   number only
   embl-id:paamir EMBL entry PAAMIR, using whatever access method is
   defined locally for the EMBL database, and searching by ID only
   embl:paami* EMBL entries PAAMIB, PAAMIE and so on, usually in
   alphabetical order, using whatever access method is defined locally
   for the EMBL database
   embl or EMBL:* All sequences in the EMBL database
   @mylist Reads file mylist and uses each line as a separate USA. This
   is standard VMS list file syntax, also used in SRS 4.0 but missing in
   SRS 5.0. The list file is a list of USAs (one per line). List files
   can contain references to other lists files or any other standard USA.
   list::mylist Same as "@mylist" above
   'getz -e [embl-id:paamir] |' The pipe character "|" causes EMBOSS to
   fire up getz (SRS 5.1) to extract entry PAAMIR from EMBL in EMBL
   format. Any application or script which writes one or more sequences
   to stdout can be used in this way.
   asis::atacgcagttatctgaccat So far the shortest USA we could invent. In
   'asis' format the name is the sequence so no file needs to be opened.
   This is a special case. It was intended as a joke, but could be quite
   useful for generating command lines.
   
  Input sequence formats
  
   To date, the following sequence formats are accepted as input.
   
   By default, (i.e. if no format is explicitly specified) EMBOSS tries
   each format in turn until one succeeds.
   
   Input Format Comments
   gcg GCG 9.x and 10.x format with the format and sequence type
   identified on the first line of the file
   gcg8 GCG 8.x format where anything up to the first line containing
   ".." is considered as heading, and the remainder is sequence data.
   This format is complicated by the header appearing to be in other
   formats such as EMBL, and by the possibility of reading a large amount
   of data in the wrong format before discovering that there is no ".."
   line because it is not GCG format after all.
   embl
   em EMBL entry format, or at least a minimal subset of the fields. The
   Staden package and others use EMBL or similar formats for sequence
   data.
   swiss
   sw SWISSPROT entry format, or at least a minimal subset of the fields.
   fasta
   pearson FASTA format with an optional accession number after the
   sequence identifier, eg:
   >name description
   or
   >name accession description
   and with an optional database name in GCG style fasta format included
   as part of the sequence identifier, eg:
   >database:name accession description
   ncbi FASTA format with optional accession number and database name in
   NCBI style included as part of the sequence identifier. eg
   >database|accession|id description
   (and other variants on this theme!)
   genbank
   gb GENBANK entry format, or at least a minimal subset of the fields.
   nbrf
   pir NBRF (PIR) format, as used in the PIR database sequence files.
   codata CODATA format.
   strider DNA strider format
   clustal
   aln ClustalW ALN (multiple alignment) format.
   phylip PHYLIP non-interleaved multiple alignment format.
   acedb ACeDB format
   msf Wisconsin Package GCG's MSF multiple sequence format.
   hennig86 Hennig86 format
   jackknifer Jackknifer format
   jackknifernon Jackknifernon format
   nexus
   paup Nexus/PAUP format
   nexusnon
   paupnon Nexusnon/PAUPnon format
   treecon Treecon format
   mega Mega format
   meganon Meganon format
   ig IntelliGenetics format.
   staden
   experiment The experiment file format used by the "gap" program in the
   Staden package, where the sequence identifier is optional and the
   remainer is plain text. Some alternative nucleotide ambiguity codes
   are used and must be converted.
   unknown
   text
   plain Plain text. This is the format with no format. The whole of the
   file is read in as a sequence. No attempt is made to parse the file
   contents in any way. Anything is acceptable in this format.
   raw Like unknown/text/plain format except that it accepts only
   alphanumeric and whitespace characters and rejects anything else.
   asis This is not so much a sequence format as a quick way of entering
   a sequence on the command line, but it is included here for
   completeness. Where a filename would normally be given, in asis format
   there is the sequence itself. An example would be:
   asis::atacgcagttatctgaccat
   In 'asis' format the name is the sequence so no file needs to be
   opened. This is a special case. It was intended as a joke, but could
   be quite useful for generating command lines.
   
  Output sequence formats
  
   To date, the following sequence formats are available as output.
   
   Some sequence formats can hold multiple sequences in one file, these
   are marked as multiple in the following table. The details of how many
   sequences are held in one file differs between formats, but they
   either allow many sequences to be concatenated one after the other, or
   they hold the sequences together in some sort of aligned set of
   sequences.
   
   Other formats, such as GCG, plain and staden formats can only hold one
   sequence per file, these are marked as single. An attempt to
   concatenate several sequences in one file leaves the results as a mess
   that makes it impossible to decide where the sequences start and end
   or what is annotation and what is sequence.
   
   These single formats therefore cause problems when there are multiple
   sequences to write out because a single file containing multiple
   sequences in that format is invalid. When these formats are specified
   for output, an EMBOSS program will allow you to write many sequences
   to one file, but EMBOSS programs will not be able to reliably read in
   the resulting mess.
   
   N.B This behaviour changed in EMBOSS version 1.7.0. (31 Oct 2000)
   Previously, EMBOSS programs that were asked to write multiple
   sequences in a single format whould ignore the requested output file
   name and would write each sequence into a separate file whose name was
   constructed from the sequence name and the name of the format. This
   resulted in ouput to files whose names could not be reliably
   controlled. A decision was taken that EMBOSS users were intelligent
   people who could live with the consequences of their actions and who
   could learn not to write out multiple sequences to a file in formats
   that could not cope with multiple sequences.
   
   It you really wish to write multiple sequences out in formats that can
   not cope with multiple sequences, you are advised to add the global
   qualifier -ossingle on the command line. This will force the EMBOSS
   program to ignore the given output file name and will generate its own
   file names. One sequence will be written to each such file. These file
   names are made from the sequence ID name, with the name of the format
   as the extension (e.g. hsfau.gcg).
   
   This is not ideal. Preferably, you should stay away from formats that
   can't cope with multiple sequences in a file.
   
   Output Format Single/
   Multiple Comments
   gcg single Wisconsin Package GCG 9.x and 10.x format with the sequence
   type on the first line of the file.
   gcg8 single GCG 8.x format where anything up to the first line
   containing ".." is considered as heading, and the remainder is
   sequence data.
   embl
   em multiple EMBL entry format with available fields filled in and
   others with no infomation omitted. The EMBOSS command line allows
   missing data such as accession numbers to be provided if they are not
   obtainable from the input sequence.
   swiss
   sw multiple SwisProt entry format with available fields filled in and
   others with no infomation omitted. The EMBOSS command line allows
   missing data such as accession numbers to be provided if they are not
   obtainable from the input sequence.
   fasta multiple Standard Pearson FASTA format, but with the accession
   number included after the identifier if available.
   pearson multiple Simple Pearson FASTA format, an alias for "fasta"
   format.
   ncbi multiple NCBI style FASTA format with the database name, entry
   name and accession number separated by pipe ("|") characters.
   nbrf
   pir multiple NBRF (PIR) format, as used in the PIR database sequence
   files.
   genbank
   gb multiple GENBANK entry format with available fields filled in and
   others with no infomation omitted. The EMBOSS command line allows
   missing data such as accession numbers to be provided if they are not
   obtainable from the input sequence.
   ig multiple Intelligenetics format, as used by the Intelligenetics
   package
   codata multiple CODATA format.
   strider multiple DNA strider format
   acedb multiple ACeDB format
   staden
   experiment single The experiment file format used by the "gap" program
   in the Staden package. Some alternative nucleotide ambiguity codes are
   used and are converted.
   text
   plain
   raw single Plain sequence, no annotation or heading.
   fitch multiple Fitch format
   msf multiple Wisconsin Package GCG's MSF multiple sequence format.
   clustal
   aln multiple Clustal multiple sequence format.
   phylip multiple PHYLIP non-interleaved format.
   phylip3 multiple PHYLIP interleaved format.
   asn1 multiple A subset of ASN.1 containing entry name, accession
   number, description and sequence, similar to the current ASN.1 output
   of readseq
   hennig86 multiple Hennig86 format
   mega multiple Mega format
   meganon multiple Meganon format
   nexus
   paup multiple Nexus/PAUP format
   nexusnon
   paupnon multiple Nexusnon/PAUPnon format
   jackknifer multiple Jackknifer format
   jackknifernon multiple Jackknifernon format
   treecon multiple Treecon format
   debug multiple EMBOSS sequence object report for debugging showing all
   available fields. Not all fields will contain data - this depends very
   much on the input format used.
   
  Future directions
  
   More formats, both for input and for output, can be easily added, so
   suggestions are always welcome.
   
  Associated qualifiers
  
   As noted previously there are many 'associated' qualifiers that alter
   the behaviour of seqret when it reads in or writes out a sequence. As
   these are used in all EMBOSS programs that read in or write out
   sequences, they are not reported by the '-help' qualifier. They are
   however reported by the pair of qualifiers: '-help -verbose':
   
   Some of the more useful associated qualifiers are:
   
   Qualifier                        Description
   -sbegin   The first position to be used in the sequence
   -send     The last position to be used in the sequence
   -sreverse Use the reverse complement of a nucleic acid sequence
   -sask     Ask the user for begin/end/reverse information
   -slower   Convert the sequence to lower case
   -supper   Convert the sequence to upper case
   -sformat  Specify the input sequence format
   -osformat Specify the output sequence format
   -ossingle Write each entry into a separate file
   -auto     Turn off prompts and don't report the one-line description
   -stdout   Write the results to 'standard output' (the screen)
   -filter   Read input from another program, write to the screen
   -options  Prompt for optional qualifiers
   -help     Display a table of the command-line options
   
   The set of associated qualifiers for sequences behave in different
   ways depending on where they appear.
   
   If these qualifiers immediately follow a parameter they apply only to
   that parameter and not to all cases. If they occur before any
   parameters, they apply to all following sequence parameters.
   
   If there are no two parameters of equal type, the order of parameters
   and their qualifiers is irrelevant.
   
   Where a qualifier is defined more than once, for example "-sformat"
   for 2 input sequences to be aligned, the qualifier name can have a
   number to indicate which sequence is meant. "-sbegin2=25" will apply
   only to the second sequence, no matter where it appears on the command
   line.
   
   The -sbegin and -send qualifiers take an integer number specifying the
   position to begin or end reading a sequence. If the number is
   positive, the number is the position counting from the first base or
   residue of the sequence. If the number is negative the position is
   counted from the end of the sequence, so position -1 is the last base
   or residue of the sequence. (If -sbegin 0 is used, it is assumed to be
   the same as -sbegin 1 and -send 0 is the same as -send -1.)
   
   The filter qualifier makes the program behave like a filter, reading
   its (first) input 'file' from the standard input, and writing its
   (first) output 'file' to the standard output. The -filter qualifier
   will also invoke the -auto qualifier, so the user is never prompted
   for any missing values.
   
   Example:

% cat sequence.seq | seqret -filter | lpr

   The example shows the application seqret being run with the -filter
   qualifier. The input file is 'piped' into the program using the unix
   command cat and the output is 'piped' directly to the unix program
   lpr, which will print it on the printer.
   
   When the -options qualifier is used and not all the parameters are
   given on the command line, it will query the user for those
   parameters. It will not only query the user for the required
   parameters as it would do without the -options qualifier, but it will
   also query the user for the optional parameters.
   
   When the -stdout qualifier is used, the user will still be prompted
   for all the info that is required, but will write to standard output
   by default. The user will also still be prompted for an output
   filename, in case the user wants to save the output to a file.
   
Usage

   Here is a sample session with seqret. It is used to extract an entry
   from a database and write it to a file:

% seqret
Input sequence: embl:paamir
Output sequence [paamir.fasta]:

   Here seqret is used to display the contents of the sequence on the
   screen:

% seqret
Reads and writes (returns) sequences
Input sequence: embl:paamir
Output sequence [paamir.fasta]: stdout

   Here it is used in three different ways to write the result to a file
   in GCG format. Once by using the qualifier '-osformat', once by using
   the format in the output USA on the command line and once by
   specifying the format in the USA at the prompt.

% seqret -osf gcg
Reads and writes (returns) sequences
Input sequence: embl:paamir
Output sequence [paamir.gcg]:


% seqret -outseq gcg::paamir.gcg
Reads and writes (returns) sequences
Input sequence: embl:paamir


% seqret
Reads and writes (returns) sequences
Input sequence: embl:paamir
Output sequence [paamir.fasta]: gcg::paamir.gcg

   Here seqret is used to produce the reverse-complement of a sequence:

% seqret -srev
Reads and writes (returns) sequences
Input sequence: embl:paamir
Output sequence [paamir.fasta]:

   Here seqret is used to extract the bases between the positions
   starting at 5 and ending at 25:

% seqret -sbegin 5 -send 25
Reads and writes (returns) sequences
Input sequence: embl:paamir
Output sequence [paamir.fasta]:

   Here seqret is used to extract the bases between the positions
   starting at 5 and ending at 5 bases before the end of the sequence:

% seqret -sbegin 5 -send -5
Reads and writes (returns) sequences
Input sequence: embl:paamir
Output sequence [paamir.fasta]:

   Here seqret is used to read all entries in the database 'tembl' that
   start with 'hs' and writes them to a file:

% seqret
Reads and writes (returns) sequences
Input sequence(s): embl:hs*
Output sequence [hs989235.fasta]:

   Here seqret is used to read all entries in the database 'tembl' that
   start with 'hs' and writes them to a file. In this example the
   specification is all done in the command line and to stop Unix getting
   confused by the '*' character, it has to have a backslash ('\') before
   it:

% seqret embl:hs\*  hs989235.fasta
Reads and writes (returns) sequences

   Here seqret is used to read only the entry 'hsfau' from the file
   'hs989235.fasta' which contains many entries:

% seqret
Reads and writes (returns) sequences
Input sequence(s): hs989235.fasta:hsfau
Output sequence [hsfau.fasta]:

   Here seqret is used to read all entries in the file 'hs989235.fasta',
   but only writes the first one of these entries out to a file:

% seqret -firstonly
Reads and writes (returns) sequences
Input sequence(s): hs989235.fasta
Output sequence [hs989235.fasta]: first.fasta

   Here seqret is used to display on the screen the short sequence
   "actgatcgtg" in uppercase in EMBL format:

% seqret -supper -osf embl asis::actgatcgtg stdout
Reads and writes (returns) sequences
ID              standard; DNA; UNC; 10 BP.
SQ   Sequence 10 BP; 2 A; 2 C; 3 G; 3 T; 0 other;
     ACTGATCGTG                                10
//

Command line arguments

   Mandatory qualifiers:
  [-sequence]          seqall     Sequence database USA
  [-outseq]            seqoutall  Output sequence(s) USA

   Optional qualifiers: (none)
   Advanced qualifiers:
   -firstonly          bool       Read one sequence and stop
   

   Mandatory qualifiers Allowed values Default
   [-sequence]
   (Parameter 1) Sequence database USA Readable sequence(s) Required
   [-outseq]
   (Parameter 2) Output sequence(s) USA Writeable sequence(s)
   <sequence>.format
   Optional qualifiers Allowed values Default
   (none)
   Advanced qualifiers Allowed values Default
   -firstonly Read one sequence and stop Yes/No No
   
Input file format

   The USA of one or more sequences.
   
Output file format

   An output USA.
   
   The output from seqret is one or more sequences, and by default will
   be written in FASTA format.
   
   If the '-firstonly' qualifier is used then only the first sequence of
   the input USA specification will be written out.
   
   In some cases the output filename will be the same as the input
   filename, but as seqret reads only the first sequence before opening
   the output file it may try to overwrite the input. Note that this is
   not true of seqretset which reads all sequences into memory at
   startup, but which can need a large amount of memory for many
   sequences..
   
Data files

Notes

   This description of what you can do when reading or writing files is
   not specific to the program seqret. All EMBOSS programs that read or
   write sequences can do the same.
   
   seqret is often one of the first programs taught in EMBOSS training
   courses. This is because it is versatile, it is extremely powerful for
   its size (17 lines of code) it illustrates many aspects of EMBOSS
   programs and it was one of the first EMBOSS programs to be written, so
   it has a special place in the hearts of EMBOSS developers.
   
   The name 'seqret' derives both from its function ("sequence return")
   and from the fact that immense amounts of functionality can come from
   so few lines of source code - most of the work is done by the EMBOSS
   libraries which the program calls and whose complexity is hidden, or
   "secret".
   
References

Warnings

Diagnostic Error Messages

Exit status

Known bugs

See also

   Program name                          Description
   cirdna       Draws circular maps of DNA constructs
   entret       Reads and writes (returns) flatfile entries
   lindna       Draws linear maps of DNA constructs
   remap        Display a sequence with restriction cut sites, translation etc
   seqretall    Reads and writes (returns) a set of sequences one at a time
   seqretset    Reads and writes (returns) a set of sequences all at once
   seqretsplit  Reads and writes (returns) sequences in individual files
   showfeat     Show features of a sequence
   showseq      Display a sequence with features, translation etc
   
   Valid names of the databases set up in your local implementation of
   EMBOSS can be seen by using the program 'showdb'.
   
Author(s)

   This application was written by Peter Rice (pmr@sanger.ac.uk)
   Informatics Division, The Sanger Centre, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus,
   Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 1SA, UK.
   
History

Target users

   This program is intended to be used by everyone and everything, from
   naive users to embedded scripts.
   
Comments
