
                                 seqsearch 
                                      
   
   
Function

   Generate files of hits for families in a scop classification file by
   using PSI-BLAST with seed alignments
   
Description

   This is part of Jon Ison's protein structure analysis package.
   
   This package is still being developed.
   
   Please ignore this program until further details can be documented.
   
   All further queries should go to Jon Ison. (Jon Ison)
   
Usage

   Here is a sample session with seqsearch:

% seqsearch

Command line arguments

   Mandatory qualifiers:
  [-escop]             infile     Name of scop classification file (embl
                                  format input)
  [-align]             string     Location of scop alignment files (input)
  [-alignextn]         string     Extension of scop alignment files
   -niter              integer    Number of PSIBLAST iterations
   -evalue             float      Threshold E-value for inclusion in family
   -maxhits            integer    Maximum number of hits
   -submatrix          string     Residue substitution matrix
  [-hits]              string     Location of scop hits files (output)
  [-hitsextn]          string     Extension of scop hits files
   -logf               outfile    Name of log file for the build

   Optional qualifiers: (none)
   Advanced qualifiers: (none)
   General qualifiers:
  -help                boolean    Report command line options. More
                                  information on associated and general
                                  qualifiers can be found with -help -verbose
   

   Mandatory qualifiers Allowed values Default
   [-escop]
   (Parameter 1) Name of scop classification file (embl format input)
   Input file Escop.dat
   [-align]
   (Parameter 2) Location of scop alignment files (input) Any string is
   accepted ./
   [-alignextn]
   (Parameter 3) Extension of scop alignment files Any string is accepted
   .salign
   -niter Number of PSIBLAST iterations Any integer value 1
   -evalue Threshold E-value for inclusion in family Any numeric value
   0.001
   -maxhits Maximum number of hits Any integer value 1000
   -submatrix Residue substitution matrix Any string is accepted
   ./EBLOSUM62
   [-hits]
   (Parameter 4) Location of scop hits files (output) Any string is
   accepted ./
   [-hitsextn]
   (Parameter 5) Extension of scop hits files Any string is accepted
   .hits
   -logf Name of log file for the build Output file seqsearch.log
   Optional qualifiers Allowed values Default
   (none)
   Advanced qualifiers Allowed values Default
   (none)
   
Input file format

Output file format

Data files

Notes

   None.
   
References

   None.
   
Warnings

   None.
   
Diagnostic Error Messages

   None.
   
Exit status

   It always exits with status 0.
   
Known bugs

   None.
   
See also

   Program name Description
   contacts Reads coordinate files and writes files of intra-chain
   residue-residue contact data
   dichet Parse dictionary of heterogen groups
   hmmgen Generates a hidden Markov model for each alignment in a
   directory
   interface Reads coordinate files and writes files of inter-chain
   residue-residue contact data
   profgen Generates various profiles for each alignment in a directory
   psiblasts Runs PSI-BLAST given scopalign alignments
   scopalign Generate alignments for families in a scop classification
   file by using STAMP
   scoprep Reorder scop classificaiton file so that the representative
   structure of each family is given first
   scopreso Removes low resolution domains from a scop classification
   file
   seqalign Generate extended alignments for families in a scop families
   file by using CLUSTALW with seed alignments
   seqsort Reads multiple files of hits and writes a non-ambiguous file
   of hits (scop families file) plus a validation file
   seqwords Generate file of hits for scop families by searching
   swissprot with keywords
   siggen Generates a sparse protein signature from an alignment and
   residue contact data
   sigscan Scans a signature against swissprot and writes a signature
   hits files
   
Author(s)

   This application was written by Jon Ison (jison@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk)
   
History

   Written (date) - author.
   
Target users

   This program is intended to be used by everyone and everything, from
   naive users to embedded scripts.
   
Comments
