
                                  seqsort 
                                      
   
   
Function

   Reads multiple files of hits and writes a non-ambiguous file of hits
   (scop families file) plus a validation file
   
Description

   This is part of Jon Ison's protein structure analysis package.
   
   This package is still being developed.
   
   Please ignore this program until further details can be documented.
   
   All further queries should go to Jon Ison. (Jon Ison)
   
Usage

   Here is a sample session with seqsort:

% seqsort

Command line arguments

   Mandatory qualifiers (* if not always prompted):
   -mode               menu       Select mode
*  -psipath            string     Location of scop hits files (input)
*  -psiextn            string     Extension of scop hits files
*  -swisspath          string     Location of seqwords hits files
*  -swissextn          string     Extension of seqwords input files
*  -psifile            string     Name of file containing processed scop hits
                                  file (input)
*  -swissfile          string     Name of file containing processed seqwords
                                  hits file (input)
   -overlap            integer    number of overlapping residues required for
                                  merging of two hits
  [-hitsf]             outfile    Name of scop hits file (output)
  [-validf]            outfile    Name of validation file (output)

   Optional qualifiers: (none)
   Advanced qualifiers: (none)
   General qualifiers:
  -help                boolean    Report command line options. More
                                  information on associated and general
                                  qualifiers can be found with -help -verbose
   

   Mandatory qualifiers Allowed values Default
   -mode Select mode
   1 (Process psiblast hits)
   2 (Process swissparse hits)
   3 (Merge psiblast and swissparse hits)
   1
   -psipath Location of scop hits files (input) Any string is accepted ./
   -psiextn Extension of scop hits files Any string is accepted .hits
   -swisspath Location of seqwords hits files Any string is accepted ./
   -swissextn Extension of seqwords input files Any string is accepted
   .swissparse
   -psifile Name of file containing processed scop hits file (input) Any
   string is accepted An empty string is accepted
   -swissfile Name of file containing processed seqwords hits file
   (input) Any string is accepted An empty string is accepted
   -overlap number of overlapping residues required for merging of two
   hits Any integer value 10
   [-hitsf]
   (Parameter 1) Name of scop hits file (output) Output file seqsort.fam
   [-validf]
   (Parameter 2) Name of validation file (output) Output file seqsort.all
   Optional qualifiers Allowed values Default
   (none)
   Advanced qualifiers Allowed values Default
   (none)
   
Input file format

Output file format

Data files

Notes

   None.
   
References

   None.
   
Warnings

   None.
   
Diagnostic Error Messages

   None.
   
Exit status

   It always exits with status 0.
   
Known bugs

   None.
   
See also

   Program name Description
   contacts Reads coordinate files and writes files of intra-chain
   residue-residue contact data
   dichet Parse dictionary of heterogen groups
   hmmgen Generates a hidden Markov model for each alignment in a
   directory
   interface Reads coordinate files and writes files of inter-chain
   residue-residue contact data
   profgen Generates various profiles for each alignment in a directory
   psiblasts Runs PSI-BLAST given scopalign alignments
   scopalign Generate alignments for families in a scop classification
   file by using STAMP
   scoprep Reorder scop classificaiton file so that the representative
   structure of each family is given first
   scopreso Removes low resolution domains from a scop classification
   file
   seqalign Generate extended alignments for families in a scop families
   file by using CLUSTALW with seed alignments
   seqsearch Generate files of hits for families in a scop classification
   file by using PSI-BLAST with seed alignments
   seqwords Generate file of hits for scop families by searching
   swissprot with keywords
   siggen Generates a sparse protein signature from an alignment and
   residue contact data
   sigscan Scans a signature against swissprot and writes a signature
   hits files
   
Author(s)

   This application was written by Jon Ison (jison@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk)
   
History

   Written (date) - author.
   
Target users

   This program is intended to be used by everyone and everything, from
   naive users to embedded scripts.
   
Comments
