
                                 seqwords 
                                      
   
   
Function

   Generate file of hits for scop families by searching swissprot with
   keywords
   
Description

   This is part of Jon Ison's protein structure analysis package.
   
   This package is still being developed.
   
   Please ignore this program until further details can be documented.
   
   All further queries should go to Jon Ison. (Jon Ison)
   
Usage

   Here is a sample session with seqwords:

% seqwords

Command line arguments

   Mandatory qualifiers:
  [-keyfile]           infile     Name of keywords file (input)
   -spfile             infile     Name of swissprot database (input)
  [-outfile]           outfile    Name of seqwords hits file (output)

   Optional qualifiers: (none)
   Advanced qualifiers: (none)
   General qualifiers:
  -help                boolean    Report command line options. More
                                  information on associated and general
                                  qualifiers can be found with -help -verbose
   

   Mandatory qualifiers Allowed values Default
   [-keyfile]
   (Parameter 1) Name of keywords file (input) Input file Required
   -spfile Name of swissprot database (input) Input file ./seq.dat
   [-outfile]
   (Parameter 2) Name of seqwords hits file (output) Output file
   test.seqhits
   Optional qualifiers Allowed values Default
   (none)
   Advanced qualifiers Allowed values Default
   (none)
   
Input file format

Output file format

Data files

Notes

   None.
   
References

   None.
   
Warnings

   None.
   
Diagnostic Error Messages

   None.
   
Exit status

   It always exits with status 0.
   
Known bugs

   None.
   
See also

   Program name Description
   contacts Reads coordinate files and writes files of intra-chain
   residue-residue contact data
   dichet Parse dictionary of heterogen groups
   hmmgen Generates a hidden Markov model for each alignment in a
   directory
   interface Reads coordinate files and writes files of inter-chain
   residue-residue contact data
   profgen Generates various profiles for each alignment in a directory
   psiblasts Runs PSI-BLAST given scopalign alignments
   scopalign Generate alignments for families in a scop classification
   file by using STAMP
   scoprep Reorder scop classificaiton file so that the representative
   structure of each family is given first
   scopreso Removes low resolution domains from a scop classification
   file
   seqalign Generate extended alignments for families in a scop families
   file by using CLUSTALW with seed alignments
   seqsearch Generate files of hits for families in a scop classification
   file by using PSI-BLAST with seed alignments
   seqsort Reads multiple files of hits and writes a non-ambiguous file
   of hits (scop families file) plus a validation file
   siggen Generates a sparse protein signature from an alignment and
   residue contact data
   sigscan Scans a signature against swissprot and writes a signature
   hits files
   
Author(s)

   This application was written by Jon Ison (jison@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk)
   
History

   Written (date) - author.
   
Target users

   This program is intended to be used by everyone and everything, from
   naive users to embedded scripts.
   
Comments
