
                                  skipseq 
                                      
   
   
Function

   Reads and writes (returns) sequences, skipping the first few
   
Description

   skipseq skips the first few sequences in a multiple set of sequences,
   and writes out the rest of them.
   
   skipseq is a variant of the standard program for reading and writing
   sequences, seqret.
   
   seqret has an option to allow it to only read the first sequence from
   a multiple set of sequences (-firstonly). seqret cannot, however, skip
   the first few sequences from a multiple set of sequence, writing out
   the rest; this is what skipseq is for.
   
   In all other respects, skipseq is the same as seqret.
   
Usage

   Here is a sample session with skipseq:

% skipseq -skip 1
Reads and writes (returns) sequences, skipping the first few
Input sequence(s): tembl:eclac*
Output sequence [eclac.fasta]:

Command line arguments

   Mandatory qualifiers:
  [-sequence]          seqall     Sequence database USA
   -skip               integer    Number of sequences to skip at start
  [-outseq]            seqoutall  Output sequence(s) USA

   Optional qualifiers: (none)
   Advanced qualifiers:
   -feature            boolean    Use feature information

   General qualifiers:
  -help                boolean    Report command line options. More
                                  information on associated and general
                                  qualifiers can be found with -help -verbose
   

   Mandatory qualifiers Allowed values Default
   [-sequence]
   (Parameter 1) Sequence database USA Readable sequence(s) Required
   -skip Number of sequences to skip at start Any integer value 0
   [-outseq]
   (Parameter 2) Output sequence(s) USA Writeable sequence(s)
   <sequence>.format
   Optional qualifiers Allowed values Default
   (none)
   Advanced qualifiers Allowed values Default
   -feature Use feature information Yes/No No
   
Input file format

   skipseq reads one or more sequences files.
   
   See the documentation for seqret to see the full range of things that
   you can do when reading and writing sequences.
   
Output file format

   skipseq writes one or more sequences files, having optionally skipped
   the first few sequences.
   
   See the documentation for seqret to see the full range of things that
   you can do when reading and writing sequences.
   
Data files

   None.
   
Notes

   None.
   
References

   None.
   
Warnings

   You may skip all of the input files.
   If the -skip value is greater than or equal to the number of input
   sequences, there is no warning: this is legal.
   
Diagnostic Error Messages

   None.
   
Exit status

   It always exits with status 0.
   
Known bugs

   None.
   
See also

   Program name                          Description
   biosed       Replace or delete sequence sections
   cutseq       Removes a specified section from a sequence
   degapseq     Removes gap characters from sequences
   descseq      Alter the name or description of a sequence
   entret       Reads and writes (returns) flatfile entries
   extractfeat  Extract features from a sequence
   extractseq   Extract regions from a sequence
   listor       Writes a list file of the logical OR of two sets of sequences
   maskfeat     Mask off features of a sequence
   maskseq      Mask off regions of a sequence
   newseq       Type in a short new sequence
   noreturn     Removes carriage return from ASCII files
   notseq       Excludes a set of sequences and writes out the remaining ones
   nthseq       Writes one sequence from a multiple set of sequences
   pasteseq     Insert one sequence into another
   revseq       Reverse and complement a sequence
   seqret       Reads and writes (returns) sequences
   seqretsplit  Reads and writes (returns) sequences in individual files
   splitter     Split a sequence into (overlapping) smaller sequences
   swissparse   Retrieves sequences from swissprot using keyword search
   trimest      Trim poly-A tails off EST sequences
   trimseq      Trim ambiguous bits off the ends of sequences
   union        Reads sequence fragments and builds one sequence
   vectorstrip  Strips out DNA between a pair of vector sequences
   yank         Reads a sequence range, appends the full USA to a list file
   
   skipseq is a variant of the standard program for reading and writing
   sequences, seqret.
   
Author(s)

   This application was written by Peter Rice
   (peter.rice@uk.lionbioscience.com)
   
History

   Written (25 June 2002) - Peter Rice
   
Target users

   This program is intended to be used by everyone and everything, from
   naive users to embedded scripts.
   
Comments
